people don't realize that schools have
all of our children they are the future
the reason why our universities are so
messed up it's not just because the
universities are telling them the wrong
things it's because they've already been
brainwashed in school and so when they
arrive at University they're just
sitting ducks
[Music]
hello everybody I had the opportunity
today to speak with Katherine burbling
who has a reputation as being the
strictest head mistress in all of Great
Britain um I went to her school the
Michaela school it's an inner city
school in London I went there about a
year ago and it was really memorable and
really quite moving what she has done
with that school
is well it was it was really something
to see those kids were alert and
learning at a rate that I'd never seen
in any educational institution even at
the highest levels of graduate seminar
let's say so that was remarkable to see
and the kids were secure and happy there
and it's a very disciplined and
structured place and the teachers were
as engaged in the educational Enterprise
as the children and also the results of
her school are Stellar that she her
students even though they're not
selected regularly graduate in the top
echelons of the standardized testing
results that are Universal across Great
Britain and they're much more likely to
be admitted to highlevel universities
than the graduates of virtually any
other school um that exists in that
country she's quite the force of nature
Katherine Burber saying that's for sure
as well so she's a very compelling and
interesting person and so I think like
seriously more power to her now she
invited me to that Michaela school and
then took a picture with me and put it
on Twitter and just got more flak for
that than you can possibly imagine and
her response to that was well to decide
at least in part to speak with me
further on the YouTube channel so that
gives you
some insight into just how much force of
character she has so a remarkable School
truly you'd be fortunate indeed to have
your children attend it and uh an
equally remarkable woman who runs it
she's she's like a character in a Harry
Potter novel seriously so join us why
don't you talk about what you are doing
at the Michaela School in London tell
everybody start right from the beginning
tell everybody what it is how it
operates and why it it works so
spectacularly well yeah well um we're in
the inner city we opened in 2014 we were
a free school which is the equivalent of
say a charter school in America um we
had to fight for three and a half years
in order to open because free schools
only started in Britain in 2010 with the
then new conservative government um and
there were a lot of people who tried to
stop us from opening um we had people
protesting outside with banners um
insulting us um every time we tried to
have a parents evening in various parts
of London uh to tell the local parents
and these are inner city parents
remember so they're poor uh brown and
black parents from the inner city um
people from outside London white people
from outside London would come in on
buses in order to stand outside with
their protest cards insulting us um in
particular me because I had spoken at
the Conservative Party Conference in
2010 and I had said that the education
system was broken and so uh they really
hated me for that and um they were
determined to stop us from setting up
this school because obviously I was evil
because I'd spoken at this conference
not that I'm even a member of the
conservative party but you know I had
spoken there and I think as a black
teacher from the inner city who you know
State educated myself uh you know I'm
not I'm just not allowed to go to the
conservative party and and give my views
uh you know if I'd been at one of the
teacher unions um saying what I thought
I think that would have been acceptable
so uh people would would I I don't know
if I don't know if what you have have to
say would be acceptable even at a
teachers union so that's true that's
true well you know people would would
would come in they'd storm the um the
the events for parents and they would
put themselves amongst the parents and
then when we would try and speak to the
parents they would stand up and start
shouting and saying things like you
betrayed us when you spoke at the
Conservative Party Conference and I'd be
thinking how could I betray you I don't
even know who you are this is ridiculous
um and so it took us three and a half
years we had to move from different
parts of London trying to find a
building eventually we managed to open
in 2014 um but even then there were
protesters outside handing leaflets to
the children telling them their lives
were in danger in our building um it's
actually quite an extraordinary story
that we ever managed to get off the
ground but we did and then um we had so
there's an inspectorate called ofstead
here in Britain and they came to see us
three years in and gave us the highest
score possible and said that we were
very good people really didn't like that
and then we a couple of years later had
what we have in Britain gcsc exams uh
that's these are National exams that
children take at age 16 and um they then
track the progress that the children
make from when they join us in uh year
seven which is the American equivalent
to grade seven and then they do these
exams when they're in grade 11 year 11
and at that time in our first year we
came fifth in the country um for for our
progress that is tracked uh uh you know
by government and we were all
celebrating of course our detractors
very much didn't like that then there
were a couple of years of covid and so
it was impossible to track progress for
the whole for the whole country in the
last two years we've come top in the
country for our progress and again um
you know our detractors very much don't
like that uh they especially don't like
when I explain why it is we're doing so
well I mean we have had over 7,000
visitors come visit the school in the
last 10 years uh from all over the world
and people can just go onto our website
and sign up um you know from from from
Australia from New Zealand from Canada
America all across Europe and lots of
British teachers who then take ideas
from our school and uh they implement it
into their own schools and I think we
have very much changed the debate around
education about what works and some of
the things that I say very much enjoy
our annoy our Progressive contractors
because I say that small C conservative
values work that uh a small C
conservative school is what's best for
children uh values like personal
responsibility a sense of Duty towards
others self-sacrifice on a personal
level for the benefit of the whole these
are all things that don't uh sit well we
are obviously very much anti- critical
race theory anti- gender ideology and
anti- division of Children according to
their gender or race or sexuality we
sing God Save the King uh our national
anthem which is basically unheard of in
Britain in America uh you know you're
not I shouldn't say yours because you're
Canadian
but your your viewers might might be a
lowed to be American and I know they're
used to hearing their their presidents
say um you know God Bless America at the
end of their uh you know speeches that
doesn't happen here in Britain um there
seems to be quite a big you know quite a
lot of Fame around British um uh the the
historical past uh the the slavery
colonialism and so on the guilt uh kind
of rests there and it's it's we don't
sort of celebrate that we might in a
football match you know definitely we
sing the national anthem then but
journalists have come to our school and
and find it quite shocking that um the
children sing God Save the King and um
why do they do that because it is a
multicultural school with children from
a whole variety of races and religions
and I believe very strongly that for uh
our school to succeed it is very much
the case that the children need to
belong together under one umbrella so we
are Michaela but we are also British um
and um being British and being Michaela
we are one together we are a team and I
think in other schools uh where they
divide you you're African you're uh you
know you're Caribbean you're Muslim
you're Hindu you're LGBT BT uh you all
of these different groups means that
children identify as part of that group
as opposed to identifying as part of the
whole and those groups are extremely
divisive and that when it comes to a
country succeeding um when you do that
your country is very unlikely to succeed
because they don't see what they have in
common indeed indeed you need to have a
shared set of common values uh in order
for multiculturalism to work and I
realize that sounds slightly at all
because I just said it shared cultural
values and then you have
multiculturalism well you know
multiculturalism can be we eat different
foods we wear different clothes but we
all sit under the same umbrella in terms
of the culture and the values that we
are sharing and um that is what they do
very much at Michaela which is why you
see children uh friendly with each other
across racial and religious divides um
which is why you know we're also very
strict I'm considered to be the
strictest head mistress in Britain
that's what people call me and um
it's not people imagine that I'm
marching up and down the corridors with
whips and chains obviously I'm not um I
love children I get to school at 6:45
every morning not because I hate
children but because I love them but it
is a more traditional disciplined
approach that works with children and
that is where they Thrive and you saw it
yourself how happy they were how joyful
they are and how excited they are about
learning uh people imag and relieved yes
yeah they were relieved to be there I
talked to lots of the kids who had come
from other schools and had been while
subject to the kind of bullying and well
General chaos and idiocy that's
characteristic of those schools and they
were I think part of the reason apart
from their excitement about being at the
school and the fact that they were being
rewarded for progressing and learning in
a manner that was genuine and the fact
that they were being attended to by like
competent adults they were also super
relieved that they weren't being hurt
and tortured and also they were proud to
be in the right manner to be part of
that community and they certainly
regarded themselves as capable and
upward oriented and it was lovely to see
that confidence so okay so I have a
bunch of questions from what you raised
already so well let's delve into the
opposition that you um encountered when
you first began this endeavor now you
said some things that were very striking
you said that as an inner city school
you had been communicating with people
who were mostly black and brown but the
people that were objecting to you were
mostly non-local people mostly white and
mostly busted in so then the question is
you know who were these people that were
busted in and uh why do why did they
think they got to speak for the local
community that's a good one and then
allied with that you said that as a
brown person I guess yourself you're not
allowed to be a conservative and so I
presume that that's something associated
with the same cabal of ideas that
animated the people who came to protest
so let's start with who were these
people and what the hell did they think
they were doing yeah well exactly so
lots of brown and black people in the
neighborhood Who desperately wanted
another choice of school I all these
white people they were actually all
white were busting from outside of
London in order to protest um now it's
interesting because you know there's
always this debate the right and the
left the left believe in racism and an
institutionalized racism and the right
don't believe in it I firmly believe in
institutionalized racism and I think
this is an example of it where there's a
whole bunch of white people on the left
who very much believe that they have the
right to dictate to brown and black
people how they ought to think so they
get very angry with me for thinking my
own thoughts you know there's a sense of
I owe them so the left Has Done Right by
black and brown people and there's some
truth to that I don't I don't deny that
but as a result we then owe uh our votes
to them we owe our thinking to them and
if we dare to stray and have our own
ideas for ourselves they're going to
make us pay so I think one of the
reasons why we had such trouble trying
to open up there were other white school
groups trying to set up uh who were Big
C conserv there's one one guy I know
Toby Young he Big C conservative he
never got the negativity that I got when
we were both setting up at the same time
he never got protests so why did they
hate me so much well because I believe
um as a as a as a brown person as you
say um I am not allowed to think as I do
and I certainly wasn't allowed to speak
at the Conservative Party Conference uh
and all of those brown and black people
who we were getting into our parent
evenings who wanted another choice of
school I think the white people who were
protesting felt that they were
protecting them that it is this
condescending uh kind of uh no bless
obled we're going to look after you you
aren't clever enough to figure out what
you want for yourselves so we are going
to stop these evil people you know it
was quite funny at one of our open
events um they were handing out leaflets
uh about me uh to stop the parents from
coming in and the leaflets said the only
reason why this school was going ahead
was because I knew the then uh Prime
Minister David Cameron now the fact is
I've never met David Cameron I still
don't know David Cameron but that was
what they were telling the parents and
the parents would read it and say oh wow
she knows the Prime Minister this is
really great so it didn't really work
for the detractors you know because they
don't understand that normal Ordinary
People don't think like them and that
what they want is a good school choice
for their children and because they're
in the okay go on well let's let's let's
zero in on that so I did a fair bit of
research 30 years ago let's say on
educational aspirations among the poor
and one of the things that was
absolutely Stark evident was that poor
people have this and poor and uneducated
people let's say have at least the same
desires that their children become
literate and successful as rich and
literate people now part of the problem
is is that especially for people who are
less literate is they don't exactly know
what to
reward with regard to their children's
developing literacy behaviors you know
their houses aren't often full of books
they don't know that their kids should
be dragging books around by the corner
of the book when they're like 18 months
old like because it isn't a literate
culture but that doesn't mean they don't
want it and so then then we could have a
bit of a discussion about the fact that
these people that you were talking to
did want a choice and so why do you
think why do you think that you had
faith in their
knowledge that they had sufficient
knowledge to make a good decision about
their children's education if the
opportunity presented itself why did you
have faith in that whereas the
protesters felt that well the
intermediation of professional agitators
was necessary in order to ensure the
safety and progress of the children I'm
also take issue too to this idea of
owing because whatever the minority
communities might owe to the left I
would say that was pretty much all
accomplished in 1965 and there's been
precious little done since then that uh
the minority communities need to feel
beholden to the left for accomplishing
so the people who who are now looking
for falty aren't the same people who
were let's say leading the Civil Rights
charge bravely in
1965 so okay so back to the parents yeah
well I mean look I know what works in
schools and um uh I believe in what
we're offering families uh I also
believe in families having Freedom of
Choice um there are some families so
it's interesting we've been going for 10
years now and uh white middle class
people do not choose our school um our
our the families who choose our school
are ethnic minority uh brown and black
kids in in the inner city the white
families just don't choose us now I say
white families there are white kids at
the school but they tend to be of
Eastern European Descent of some sort uh
it's very rare to find a middle class
white child who comes and you know every
now and again we get one but it's quite
rare and that's not what they want they
don't want the the strictness that we
offer they don't want um the the drive
the progress the progress I mean they
just don't like they don't like the
silence you know there silence in the
corridors we are very strict I am know
strictest head mistress so um
yeah they like things to be a lot more
Rel you know I didn't find your school
strict yeah that isn't how it struck me
no what I saw and I was watching MH what
I saw was that all the kids knew very
very clearly what the rules were yes but
more than that they understood why the
rules were there okay which is a major
so that's very much distinct from it
being a tyranny I never saw any use of
force or compulsion to keep the rules in
place Place yeah so that's absent
tyranny and then I saw the fact that the
you set up a reward system in your
school which is very difficult thing to
do properly at least people don't do it
and I
inquired in relationship to the children
how it was that they marked their
progress forward their little Badges and
so forth that They Carried with them
quite proudly and without cynicism I
might add which indicated to me that
they knew perfectly well that they were
being rewarded for the sort of behavior
that was in their best interests and
that that's what everyone was aiming for
and so because of that they understood
the reason for the structure of the
rules which also protected them and gave
them security and so I didn't see a
bunch of kids that were Cow cowed by
Miss trench pull you know cow cowering
in the hallways because they were afraid
to open their mouths I didn't see any of
that you know and I I also didn't feel
you can feel an atmosphere of fear and
oppression in a tyrannical institution
you you can I don't know if you can
smell it but it wouldn't surprise me but
you can certainly detect it and you
detect it you certainly wouldn't see the
walls covered for example by the
brilliant artwork of creative children
and then also you know I spent lunch
there and I watched the kids so the kids
all discussed a topic when they were
eating quite efficiently they were
eating too and they were actually eating
which was good to see and they were in
their groups focused on the topic at
hand and uh you asked them to nominate
someone from the group to stand up and
speak to the entire group and that also
I found that also startling and you know
I taught my kids when they were about
seven or eight to speak in a manner that
was would be accessible and appropriate
to a public audience to stand up not to
squirm around to figure out what the
hell they were going to say to say it
forthrightly to use a certain amount of
volume you can train a kid to do that
about half an hour if you do the work
but it never happens and so usually what
you see in a school a school performance
is you see these kids that no one has
ever paid attention to kicking their
feet and looking at the floor and
mumbling something so dull that no one
with any sense could listen to it for
more than about 4 seconds embarrassing
themselves turning red being catall
everyone talking around them and
everybody pretending that this is
acceptable and I saw Zero of that at
lunch I saw kids stand up and everyone
listen and them speak like very clearly
and in a volume that made everyone
listen and I saw everyone listen and I
saw them say something that was a
summary of what they discussed and to
say it in a manner that indicated that
they understood it and had processed it
and so that ethos was permeated the
school and I'm certain from my
observation that that was reflected in
the children's respect for the rules
they see your
rules your rules
aren't
restrictions and they're not jail cells
they're the rules that you need to play
a game right and games have rules and
everyone wants to play a game and you
people are playing a very good game and
so people are so stupid that they think
that you're a what would you call it a
rule monster of some sort all that means
is that they either refuse to see or
that they're too blind to see because
that is not what's going on in your
school and you also have evidence you
know the fact that your school is
performing so highly we should delve
into that a little bit because I want to
tell everybody watching and listening
the Michaela school is not a selective
school and that means anybody can go
there and see usually schools perform
well if they hyper select their students
because it's easier to teach let's say
kids that have been screened for IQ and
conscientiousness but you take everybody
and yet your students hyper perform on
their examinations and so so explain
that in a little more detail because
that's that that really pulls the rug
out from underneath your detractors
except the ones who don't believe in
objective Merit yeah I mean it's
interesting because you hear strict and
of course it lies with lots of people
people think tyrannical and unhappiness
and so on I always say that strict is
immersed in love and when you're strict
with with children it means you love
them enough to keep your standards high
for them and I would say that most right
teachers and parents nowadays want to be
friends with children and uh they don't
know that their duty is to have children
rise up and meet them where they are and
to demonstrate to them over and over
again what virtuous behavior is so that
they too can learn to be virtuous and
that when grandma's looking a bit sad
you say to the boy go and get her bring
her a cup of tea you explain that that
is what kindness is and every little
moment of kindness in the particular the
child is able to do over and over again
there's no point in telling children be
kind I mean you can tell them but they
won't understand what that means they
need to see examples and non-examples so
the cup of tea is an example but then
their brother hits them because he wants
to take the toy and that's an example of
unkindness and you would say well that
was unkind and this is kind over and
over and over again and over years I
know you're interested in evolutionary
psychology this is what we are as humans
you know other animals within a few
weeks or a few months in the in the
jungle they get sorted and off they go
whereas human beings take many many
years uh to be able to survive on their
own without their parents and the role
of the parents and the role of the
teacher should be to show them the
particular over and over again whether
that's about gratitude or about Duty or
about kindness and so on and then
eventually they can move that to the
abstract and they'll understand what
kindness is having seen the particular
of examples and non-examples so many
times but sadly I think that people
generally don't understand that about
children and so for instance I know I've
often said to you when you came to the
school uh you know I said to you you
never talk about schools and um and you
said oh it's true I don't really talk
about schools and I said yeah well you
should talk about schools cuz they're
the most important institutions in any
country because children are the future
and so when all of you guys and when I
say guys I mean they're women too like
Barry Weiss or Megan Kelly or John
McWater or Glenn Lowry and all these
people who have huge admiration for huge
admiration for all of you nobody ever
talks about schools nobody ever talks
about the importance of our education
system and then what you all do is you
talk about what's going on in the
universities and you say oh my goodness
how come these young people think as
they do and how come we've got all of
these marches and so on and so forth
things that are happening and we think
how come they're not thinking about
stuff in the way you know why don't they
why hav't they developed critical
thinking and this is where I sort of
have a bit of a bug bear with you and I
want to say to you you know I want to
explain why I think not just you uh all
these people I have huge admiration for
Jonathan height Abigail shrier I read
all of your stuff and I love it but when
it comes to children I think you're all
wrong Elon Musk the other day I saw him
you know on some video he was talking
about
how to teach children and he's wrong
you're all wrong and let me explain why
the fact is you're all wondering why it
is these students at University don't
think in a critical Manner and then what
you all say is what we need to do is
teach them how to think not what to
think but you're wrong we need to teach
them what to think okay if as because
what's currently happening is we are
teaching them how to think and what does
that mean in fact I should ask you when
when will say things like that it teach
them how to think what do you
mean Saudi Arabia recently ended its
50-year Petro dollar deal with the US
which has the potential to weaken the US
dollar since 1974 Saudi Arabia has sold
oil solely in US Dollars which was huge
for our global economic dominance now
they want other options if there's less
demand for the US dollar what happens to
its value it's reasons like this that
make it important to diversify some of
your savings into gold and you can do
that with help from Birch gold for over
20 years Birch gold group has helped
tens of thousands of Americans protect
their savings by converting an IRA or
401K into an IRA in physical gold to
learn more text Jordan to 98 989 and
claim your free no obligation info kit
on gold with their Education First
approach Birch gold has earned the trust
of thousands of happy customers they
understand that navigating financial
decisions can be scary that's why their
dedicated in-house Ira department is
there to guide you every step of the way
protect your savings with gold text
Jordan to 9898 98 and talk to one of
birch Gold's experts and claim your free
info kit today text Jordan to 98898
that's Jordan to 98 9898
[Music]
today well we mean with this Peterson
Academy that I'm putting forward is that
we don't want a university and I
speaking specifically of universities to
be an ideological propaganda Factory and
so really it's a dig at the radical left
okay and so and then I and and I would
also say I'll say two things in response
to the other things you said um I have
talked privately with any number of
government officials especially on the
Republican side about the absolute
catastrophe that's unfolding in the K
through2 system and one of my dreams and
you can tell me what you think about
this is that I think that the right to
teacher certification should be taken
away from the faculties of Education
okay because I think they have done a
job that's so abysmal that it it's
almost indes rable and I've talked to
plenty of Republican Governors about
this and it's one of my lifelong
Ambitions yes I agree we'll 100% agree
on that teach training institutions are
a disaster but okay and it's really
interesting what you said you don't want
this ideology just pumped through kids
and I 100% not universities that's not
the same as K through 12 you know I also
agree with your approach from the
particular upward with regards to
children I so that's crucial I know it's
just that when you will talk about this
business of teaching them how to think
what that looks like in a classroom in a
high school is that okay so what that is
is is the standard discussion between
Knowledge and Skills should we teach
them knowledge or should we teach them
skills how to think is a skill and it
can only be done within do a c a
particular domain so uh I don't know how
to think about cars okay you told me you
put a car in front of me and said create
a different kind of car Katherine
creative think outside the box I
wouldn't know what to do because I don't
know anything about cars but if you tell
me to turn education on its head I've
done exactly that I've been very radical
I've thought outside the box and I've
done things very differently why because
I know education inside out the only way
you can think in a creative manner or
think outside the box and have
independent thoughts about anything is
to know it really well and so that means
children at school level need to be
taught loads of knowledge
so when you all say things like we need
to teach them how to think I disagree
with you when I say we need to teach
them what to think what I mean by that
is we need to give them knowledge uh
about the world wars about slavery about
colonialism about all of these ideas
that if they don't have historical
knowledge they're unable to make a a a
judgment that is well informed and that
isn't just going to go down an
ideological route you know all children
are communists okay they're all
Communists when you talk talk to them
they're all Communists because when they
hear about communism they go you mean
everybody's going to have equality you
mean everybody's we're going to share
and then you know everybody poor and
Rich doesn't happen anymore everybody's
just the same that's lovely and the
reason why children are all Communists
is because they're naive they're
vulnerable and they it sounds nice to
them and so that's what they go for they
don't have enough knowledge or enough
wisdom to be able to make correct
decisions that's why for instance we ban
alcohol we ban
cigarettes I believe we should ban
smartphones we ban sex we ban marriage
we M ban driving there are all kinds of
things that we ban from children and the
thing about the libertarian right uh
while I myself believe in Freedom and I
believe in freedom of speech and all of
that when it comes to children I don't
believe in any of it I believe that
children need their freedoms restricted
so that later in life they can be truly
free and when I say their freedoms need
to be restricted that doesn't mean that
they're unhappy you saw at my school
just how happy they were so let me let
me ask you a clarifying question yeah do
you mean that their freedoms should be
restricted or do you mean that the
domain within which they have freedom
should be
restricted well no I I would because
those are different right because the
one tilts more to in some sense
conceptually towards control see let let
me give you an example you tell me what
you think about this this is a very
concrete example so it brings it down to
earth so imagine you have a
four-year-old child and he has a closet
full of clothes like 40 outfits to wear
and they're all hanging on a um on
hangers and maybe he's a little hungry
and a little tired and you open up the
closet you say what of which of those
outfits do you want to wear and he has a
meltdown okay and so imagine that
instead you take three of those items of
clothing off the hangers and you put
them on the bed and you say which of
those three pieces of clothing would you
like to wear and then he can point to
one with no problem it's like a so
there's a consumer Choice literature for
example that shows PE you that if you
have four shampoos to choose from on the
shelf and you pick one you're happier
with your purchase than you are if you
have 200 on the Shelf to pick from
because you drown in complexity and
you've probably made made the wrong
choice so with children my sense is that
you know they need that play that
enables them to decide but adults are
supposed to be wise enough so that the
domain of choice that's presented to
them is commensurate with their actual
emotional and cognitive ability so well
I'm wondering what you think of that
formulation yeah I don't think the the
four-year-old should be choosing a tool
I don't I think you're in a rush you
need to get him to school get him in his
clothes yes there's that right and
sometimes I'm in thek that's thee I'm in
the supermarket and I'm watching parents
say darling what would you like from the
freezer to eat and I'm looking at them
thinking why are you asking them just
take what you want put it in the basket
and go you've got a life you know like
these children who are the center of the
world we need to ask them what they
think about everything we have to ask
them what would you like to eat put the
spinach and broccoli in front of them
and tell them to eat it and that's what
we do at Michaela they have one they
don't have any choice at lunch they all
eat the same thing and we call it family
lunch and you had lunch with the
children why we why do we call it family
lunch because it's like family dinner
and why is what what used to happen at
family dinner I have to say I don't
think this happens anymore in many
households because everybody's on their
phone or their iPad and they take their
plate of food and they go and sit in
their bedroom but what should be
happening is that you sit around a table
and that you're being Ser you all serve
out the food and you're all eating from
one pot of food and if you don't like it
very much well you suck it up because
that's what it is is to be a child okay
and you learn how to eat different foods
because your parents don't let you to
get away with this idea of I'm a free
human being and it's against my human
rights and I should be able to eat what
I want no you shouldn't be able to eat
what you want you're a child now look
that's why people call me strict but
it's because I love them that I think we
should be doing this because by doing
that we teach them how to become adults
be communal and you talk about exactly
you say you don't want children you
shouldn't bring up children who you're
going to dislike well the more choices
and the more freedom you give them in
that sense the more you're going to
dislike them as adults I mean the the
fact is you cannot be friends with your
children when they're children and be
friends with them when they're adults
you have to choose and you should not be
friends with them when they're children
because otherwise you're not going to be
you're not going to like them when
they're adults you are in a position of
authority and you should be molding your
child and helping him with his moral
formation and giving him knowledge and
the school should be doing both as well
both moral formation and giving him
knowledge and where I worry about the
libertarian right is the the the
freedoms that they enjoy amongst adults
they then impose that on children or
they don't realize that that's what
they're doing and then they think oh my
goodness but why is it all these
students at University are behaving the
way that they do it's because the
schools have not taught them what to
think I when I say what to think giving
them the facts about the various world
the world wars giving them the facts
about the history of their country
making them feel as if they belong in
their country and that their history
belongs to them that the geography of
their country is taught to them if on
the other hand the school is convinced
that actually what they need to do is um
teach them how to think and then nobody
can agree on what that looks like
because it's a skill and outside of its
domain of knowledge it cannot be taught
independently it's impossible all you
can do is give children knowledge you
see what those skills are is actually
bits of knowledge and when you give them
lots of bits of knowledge about say the
second world war they are then be able
to piece together what they think of it
now the problem we've got nowadays is
that the schools are teaching them with
a particular ideology in mind so in
Britain for instance I I I see very much
that history lessons in schools they
will be teaching about how the British
were really racist and how the Indian
soldiers who were fighting for Britain
were treated very badly and you know
what I'm not even saying that isn't true
but when it comes to secondary school
children who might have one or two
lessons a week in history and they're
only going to have it for a few years
wouldn't it be it shouldn't the focus be
uh them knowing 1914 and 1918 shouldn't
the focus be them knowing about Hitler
in the second world War I mean like like
there there there are certain facts that
the children they've never heard of the
battle of the S they've never heard of
um uh the the details of of the various
key battles in the first world war and
the second world war and they've never
heard of them because they're too busy
being taught stories that are
ideological which will convince them
that the British for instance are racist
or convince them that there were various
important female characters in our
historical history and that that's what
that's what matters and of course
Elizabeth first absolutely but there are
there are other people that are brought
forward as being very important when
they're not so important but because
they're taught through an ideological
lens uh which is 2024 as opposed to uh
teaching them the basics of their own
history so that they can feel that they
are British well your car analogy is the
right one I think in some ways is what
are you going to have to think about or
say about a car if you don't know what
all the parts are and how they work
together
so and and and so it is so important
then that we give them knowledge and if
some of you are saying what we need to
do is teach them how to think it means
they're not taught anything because that
skill cannot be taught in isolation and
schools try to do that in isolation they
try to teach skills what they ought to
be doing is teaching knowledge and if
they don't teach them knowledge children
are leaving school not knowing very much
and if they don't know very much like I
said they're all Communists like I said
they're always going to take the side of
the underdog and I'm not saying that
that's necessarily wrong but it's wrong
if you don't have the knowledge and
information that could make you see why
always taking the side of the underdog
is not necessarily the right option and
that that it's complex and that wouldn't
it be nice perhaps I mean I don't even
wouldn't even necessarily agree that it
would be nice for everything to be equal
but let's imagine they think wouldn't it
be nice that actually the reality of
Communism isn't that and that they need
more information before they can make a
properly informed decision now that
should be the job of schools at the
moment it is immersing them in ideology
but the big the biggest problem is for
me is those on the right who I very much
agree with they don't realize that
they're giving a back door they're
leaving the back door open to
progressivism to take over the culture
and the tyrannical culture of the left
has taken over our schools because the
right keeps arguing for this freedom for
children to have and we're arguing for
children to to to be able to think what
they want and do what they want children
shouldn't be allowed to do that now look
when you were at our school you didn't
see them unhappy you saw them playing in
the yard you saw them they play
basketball they play you know football
table they you know and we don't have a
big yard we don't have any grass or any
trees uh you know we we we are an inner
city school with not many resources but
what we've got the children have fun and
they love it they love it because they
are secure in the knowledge that we love
them and we are teaching them knowledge
that makes them feel really smart clever
successful and then eventually they can
come up with their own ideas but they
cannot come up with their own ideas
isolated away from knowledge that
knowledge is absolutely Cru
but the right never talk about the
importance of knowledge and they never
talk about the importance of schools
because people don't realize that
schools have all of our children they
are the future and what the reason why
our universities are so messed up it's
not just because the universities are
telling them the wrong things it's
because they've already been brainwashed
in school and so when they arrive at
University they're just sitting ducks
you know that in the United States the K
through 12 system approximately
eats up 50% of the state
budgets yes right no exactly am Mone so
what that so yeah you might say that all
right so what this means fundamentally
and i' like I said I've been hammering
this home at the Republicans is that the
classic liberals and the conservatives
have turned half the government revenues
over to radical incompetent
ideologically bound progressives trained
in the worst faculties in the
universities right you know we we did a
study that showed
that taking one politically correct
course was a significant predictor in
whether you were a politically correct
authoritarian right so there were
another of other predictors but that was
one of them and it's an absolute it's a
fate ACC comple on the side part of the
radical left that they've 100% occupied
the school systems and you know there
are Republican Governors and so forth
that have tried to take on the teachers
unions in the United States and they
often lose because it isn't obvious that
the governors have more power especially
more staying power than the teachers
unions and so it's it's a tough battle
and I think the Achilles heel is teacher
certification that should be stripped
from those faculties of education and
then they would collapse under their own
weight that's true however teachers tend
to be on the left okay they tend to be
and if they are immersed in a culture
that is telling them that what they
ought to be doing with children is
getting them to understand just how
awful their country is that to be a good
teacher you want to sort of radicalize
them and make them into revolutionaries
so that they can stand up against their
repressive government because actually
what we want is a more communist Society
or we want a society where critical race
Theory Reigns and gender ideology Reigns
you know like when you were telling me
about the little boy in his outfits and
I was thinking well what if he were to
choose a a dress and want to put that on
I think the parent should put the dress
away no you don't put that on the bed
well indeed so you don't give them that
choice so one of the right definitely
not exactly one of the big jokes
Michaela is you know tuna or cheese
because when we go off to a on a school
trip the kids get to choose a sandwich
either tuna or cheese that's the extent
of their choice right right and they
they're happier for it children are
happier because they're in a secure
environment where they're loved and
they're able to be taught what they need
to develop their own ideas and their own
opinions the thing is is that
paradoxically the way in which children
become creative the way in which they
become independently minded is through
giving them lots and lots of knowledge
and the more knowledge they have the
more hooks they have in their heads to
be able to hang more knowledge on and
then that it grows exponentially and
often it's the rich kids who only have
access to that knowledge because they
access it when they go on holiday with
their parents around the world when they
go and watch documentaries when they
talk to their Uncle who's a banker and
their aunt who's a doctor and so on they
find out about the whole world if it
isn't the case that inner city kids also
get that opportunity from their teachers
then they just don't know very much now
I have to say I think it's even
happening with the with the more
well-off kids as well these days and so
we're allowing children to lead children
cannot lead because they are children
and what I worry about on the right is
that our right right our commentators on
the right don't realize just how much as
a society we have become unored from
from from the coast so think of us as a
as a boat and we used to be anchored to
the side right next to the beach there
but we've we're no longer anchored and
we're hundreds of miles off the coast
now right and we're hundreds of miles
off the coast for a school to succeed we
have to bring that fence in we have got
to do much of that moral form ourselves
because it's not necessarily coming from
the families and that's because families
look I know from so many people if
you're a bit of a disciplinarian at home
you are looked down upon by your friends
because they say oh you're just a bit of
a meany you should let children do
whatever they want even the the the
government in in Britain will send a
nurse round when you've had a child to
see whether or not you're doing the
right things and the things that the
nurse tell you to do it's all the wrong
stuff one of my teachers who went off of
maternity leave she said to me we have
to pretend that we're doing this stuff
but we don't want to do it because we
we're Michaela teachers both of them
they're married and they're at the
school and they don't want to do that
stuff because otherwise the state is
actually going to undermine the more
traditional values that they have got in
bringing up their
child this month marks 2 years since the
overturning of roie Wade but did you
know that the number of abortions has
actually increased since then new
estimates show that more than 1 million
babies were killed by abortion in 2023
the highest number of abortions in over
a decade the overturning of roie Wade
has unfortunately made the abortion pill
more readily available now accounting
for up to 64% of all abortions but
pre-born continues to stand strong
rescuing 200 lives every day pre-born is
the largest pro-life organization in the
country they provide free ultrasounds to
mothers with unplanned pregnancies to
introduce them to the precious life
growing inside of them when a mother
meets her baby on ultrasound and hears
their heartbeat she is twice as likely
to choose life how can you help one
ultrasound costs only $28 and could be
the difference between life and death
please join the fight by sponsoring one
2 or more ultrasounds if you have the
means you can sponsor pre-born entire
network for a day for
$5,000 all gifts are tax deductible and
whatever gift you give will go towards
saving lives to donate dial pound 250
and say the keyword baby that's pound
250 keyword baby or go to pre-born
docomo that's pre-born do.com
Jordan well so your comments your
comments on the right let's say I would
say that's probably particularly
relevant and you alluded to this it's
particularly relevant to the libertarian
right and the libertarian
right suffers from the delusion that if
you just let people make choices
including Market choices that everything
will work out for the best but they
don't understand and they should
understand that even the small L
liberals whose ideas they're essentially
utilizing understood that that
individual Freedom was only possible in
a society that was moured in the way
that you indicated with your ship
analogy is like once the game rules are
in place
then everybody can be free to play but
if you can't agree on the damn rules
you're you don't have freedom you have
chaotic counterproductive chaotic
revolutionary Anarchy then you're done
that's right so that's why the phrase
teach them how to think doesn't work
because when you're off 100 miles off
the coast it doesn't work when we were
next to the the shore that was fine but
nowadays so let me give you an example
Jonathan height he's written um his book
on the uh anxious generation I think
it's absolutely brilliant he's talking
about the damage that Tech has been
doing to children and smartphones in
particular and how uh this has made
their mental health Skyrocket how uh
they're it's completely destroying
children it's just awful and it's
fantastic book but one of the things
that he argues for Abigail shrier in in
her excellent book bad therapy also
mentions this sort of thing where they
want children to have the freedom that
they had when they were growing up so
when you and I and Jonathan height and
ab Abigail sh when we were all growing
up we could ride our bike to the corner
shop we'd leave it outside we'd go in we
could find friends down the street and
we'd play football and it was all great
soccer for your American uh viewers and
um and it was all great and they're
worry now rightly is that children are
on their iPads and their phones and
that's correct however they Jonathan
height will then criticize families for
being a little bit too protective of
their kids uh not wanting them to go
places on their own and so on and I
understand when it comes to a more
middle class intake his arguments will
stand but you know I don't blame our
inner city parents for not wanting their
children to be wandering around in the
inner city because it is actively
dangerous uh they we we constantly have
children who are well constantly but
every now and again we have children who
are mugged uh one of the reasons why our
children don't get mugged as often is
because my teachers go out at the end of
every school day and make sure they get
them on their buses so that they can get
home safe but if our teachers weren't
there all kinds of trouble would would
would break out um I'm constantly giving
assemblies about how get home right away
the local schools fights break out in
the in the street and even if you're not
just well you are in physical danger but
it's also the case that your child could
be led astray they're taken down to the
chicken shop they then get involved in
gangs and all kinds of things so parents
need very much to be on top of their
children Jonathan height doesn't realize
this and he doesn't realize it partly I
suppose because he doesn't know
disadvantaged children in the inner city
but it's also because he has this uh
love nostalgic view as do many of us
have of what it was like to grow up say
in the 1970s 1980s and we remember the
freedom we had and we say this is what
we need to give to our children now but
what he doesn't realize is that there
was an invisible shield that surrounded
Us in the 1980s when I W they were
called mothers well mothers fathers
communities so I think I remember me and
my sister we we cycled down the road my
sister fell on the ground and hurt
herself really badly we were able to
knock on the neighbor's door we were
able to go in and she bandaged her up
and she told us come on it's all right
you can do it and she got us back home
you cannot we we do not have the levels
of trust and levels of virtue necessary
for that kind of Freedom we cannot argue
for freedom without virtue Freedom
requires virtue and we have we are we
are 100 miles off the coast that's the
problem and so to get back to the coast
we are in the process I would say at
Michaela of trying to establish a whole
new National way of being um where we
buy into a multicultural Community where
we sing God Save the King where we uh
uphold certain values communal values
that we all buy into so you may have
heard about our recent uh case in the
courts over prayer I don't know if you
heard about this uh one one of the
children and her her mother took us to
court uh wanting a prayer room and our
position is no uh there is no prayer
room and there is no prayer room now and
and thank goodness we won that court
case um and one of the reasons why is
that we would we have several Muslim
children and we would have to have
several prayer rooms to make that work
and that would get rid of our silent
corridors it would get rid of probably
the family lunch that you saw it would
totally change the ethos of the school
and it is my belief that children should
not be dictating to me how to run the
school as I just said children should
not have all of those choices open to
them they are given restricted choices
within a framework where we know what's
best
just like you said about the three
outfits although as I said for a
four-year-old I don't think he should be
choosing his outfits at all but I might
say a 12-year-old could have a few
choices and um and so we fought that and
I went to the high court in order to
defend our ethos and our belief that
children need handholding they are
children which is why I 100% agree with
Jonathan height that they shouldn't have
smartphones and they shouldn't have
unsupervised access to the internet but
every time I talk about this on Twitter
there are all these Libertarians who
come on and say stop being such a you
know why are you trying to take away
their freedom why are you being so
miserable about this you shouldn't give
so much control to the state cuz I would
love it if the government were to ban
phones for under 16s um but they ban
alcohol they ban cigarettes they ban
marriage they ban sex and porn and so on
and they should ban those things so and
why do they ban them because it's our
role as adults to be protective of
children and to look after them and I
worry that those on the left certainly
don't they think freefor all everybody
do whatever you want those on the right
get Hoodwinked into this because they
think oh freedom for PE for for adults
freedom of speech absolutely but I don't
give my children freedom of speech they
don't get to just jump up and say
whatever it is they want no matter how
insulting it is to other children they
don't get to be rude they don't get to
tell the the teachers to f off and so on
obviously they don't get to do that
they're children I mean now I don't
think adults should be arrested for
saying F off on the street but put my
children in detention if they say it in
school because they are children and
it's about us understanding the
difference between adults and children
and how far off the coast we
are if we can't understand the
difference between men and women we're
going to have an even more difficult
time understanding the difference
between I'm dead serious about that okay
I want to ask you something that I found
mysterious too that I don't know enough
about your school approach so you know
you're you're kind of a force of Nature
and of yourself and and I thought when I
went to the school that you know I
didn't know how well you would have been
able to disseminate your technology of
teaching let's say to your teachers but
what I saw were teachers
thriving but also a commonality of
approach between the classrooms very
intense style of interacting with the
kids why don't you describe two things
if you would what your teachers and your
children are actually doing in the
classroom and then how in the world you
trained your teachers to do that okay so
really good question and this is where I
think people are both on the left and
the right are just mistaken about what
works in the classroom so uh in the last
50 years this idea of inquiry based
learning uh Project work uh
cross-curricular work uh Discovery
learning all stemming from John dwey in
the early 20th century um they they
think that that is what makes children
into thinking beings and they forget
about that in the years in Elizabethan
times Shakespeare will likely have gone
to a grammar school probably the new
King's school um in in in
1570s uh it's the case that Isaac Newton
went to a grammar school and Lincoln
share Margaret Thatcher went to one too
and these old grammar schools uh taught
a traditional education but it's also
the case that Nelson Mandela uh stokeley
Carl Michael who uh coined the term
black power so real revolutionaries also
so creative Geniuses Newton created
calculus I mean Nelson Mandela of course
an extraordinary revolutionary so people
across their fields have transformed our
world for the better and they've done so
by having a traditional education that
traditional education prizes knowledge
in the center of the classroom and
teaches it in a traditional way that
often uh people both on the left and the
right reject and we see unfortunately
people think that the best kind of
teaching is one where they're left to
discover it on their own and this
inquiry idea it's wrong what you need to
do and what our what you saw our
teachers doing is teaching the children
knowledge you tell them what you want
them to know right so you're not
teaching them how to think you're
telling them what to think this is what
happened in X year this is how what's
how science works this is this is
Shakespeare we're going to read him
we're going to understand him so you do
that and you get them you do turn to
your partner and they talk to each other
and then you get them to give their
hands up and you have a class discussion
and you're going at pace which you saw
and you're giving them lots of knowledge
and you're checking to see whether or
not they have understood it and you are
drilling them in that knowledge so you
saw lots of passing of information but
you saw lots of drilling as well of that
information so well let me ask you about
that okay so so this is is what I
observed I want to drill down into this
because I think it's really important um
and and I also think it's revolutionary
because like I said I never saw
education progressing at the rate that
you managed in your classrooms anywhere
and so okay so I saw the teachers up at
the front of the class and then they
were disseminating the information in
the manner that you described so they
were they were lecturing essentially and
in a very pointed manner looking at all
the kids so they were good lecturers too
they weren't these mumbly idiots who are
like reading boring crap off a overhead
you know and and not even interested
themselves they were really engaged with
the kids but then you also spiced it up
continually so there'd be like a burst
of information and the kids were
listening like like I said like cats
following a laser and then this is where
I I saw the choice in some sense for the
kids entering or the participation or
the play because then the teachers would
turn the discussion over what to pairs
of students yes to discuss what had just
been delivered yes and that was a Tim
limited thing that they had to do
quickly yes right and so then that's
where the kids had some creative play
yes and so like do you have an
orchestral time sheet for the pace is it
like five minutes of instruction 30
seconds of interaction you know a minute
of response like how do you orchestrate
this exactly okay so the turn to your
partner for instance lots of schools
will do pair work they will
unfortunately I think do group work um
and the reason why I think it's
unfortunate that group work happens is
because you may remember I mean well I
remember well okay so even at your age I
was about to say you might it may have
been done so the thing is group work
what are you doing you're talking about
who you fancy what you're doing that
evening you know what you think of the
teacher you're talking about all kinds
of things you're not actually talking
about the work when we do pair work it's
very quick because we know that if we
don't make it quick they're going to end
up talking about goodness knows what but
they're not talking about the work so we
need to keep them focused now we're
telling them the knowledge they are then
able to discuss the knowledge and really
make it theirs and understand it they're
able to come back to the teacher they're
far more likely to put their hands up
because they now know that they just
discuss it with their friend and they
feel a lot more confident which is why
well they were competing to put their
hands up which was I also thought was
amazing they weren't sitting there in
the back like looking at their shoes
they were all exactly striving to be
called upon that's right and so that's
because they're all super confident
because they've just spoken to their
partner so then they put their hands up
and the culture of the school is then
you're always putting your hand up
you're always answering you're always
feeling good if you get the answer wrong
your teacher's going to tell you because
we are 100% honest with the kids in that
way because and then we can come back to
that kid later and say okay so you give
me an answer to some other question so
that bigs him up in that moment and the
kids love learning I always say children
go to school to learn and if they don't
learn they will stop going to school so
we have a massive attendance problem
here in Britain at the moment where kids
are not going to school I suspect it's
the same in other Western countries and
the fact is they say it's co it's co and
yes it was because of Co because Co set
in a culture in our schools where kids
didn't go to school but it's also the
case that if children do not feel that
they are learning at school they're not
going to turn up we do not have
attendance an attendance problem at
Michaela because the kids know that if
they miss a day they're missing a hell
of a lot of learning and so now they
have a quiz every week in every lesson
in every subject they have a quiz once a
week and they want to do well on that
and if they don't there's always three
kids at the bottom well you're going to
get a detention right it might not be
three but there always going about that
okay tell me about that so two things
you reward the kids and you do that in a
very um what would you say obvious and
public manner they get these little
badges for doing things right but that
that wasn't the amazing thing because I
could imagine as a 13-year-old having
these badges at hand and being entirely
cynical about them and even looking down
on the kids who were striving to get
them and that is not what I saw at
Michaela's school I saw that they valued
their Badges and that they really wanted
to earn them and so I don't understand
how you managed that now I saw that one
of the things you were doing was very
targeted and immediate reward so if the
kid was right you let them know and they
got a little point they got points we
have merits and Dem merits merits yeah
right and they're very performance
linked and they're immediate that's
right so I'm expecting anywhere from 30
to 50 merits to be given out in a lesson
and there will also be some demerits I
look myself every six weeks or so at a
sheet to make sure that there's at least
four to five merits being given out on
generally in comparison to the number of
demerits that you'll give so the the the
four 5 to one yeah something like that
sometimes I've got six seven to one you
okay good so so it's very positive and
the kids are there they're wanning their
merits now we have a um a a pyramid and
if you're at the bottom of the pyramid
you do the the right thing because you
want to avoid A
detention and then the next step up is
you want to you do the right thing
because you want to get a merit and the
next step is uh Step Up is so that's one
and two then to get to three you do the
right thing because you want to impress
your teachers and then the next step up
is you do the right thing because you
understand that the person who you are
now is the person who you will likely
become in the future and so you want to
become the best person that you can be
now so you can be a good person in the
future and you can also have a future
job that you enjoy and so on and at the
very top of the pyramid it's who you are
it's who we are is what we say so we are
trying to move the children for every
characteristic out there whether it's
100% effort on the homework being on
time uh being kind to people being
grateful when you saw you saw the
appreciations at the end of lunch where
the children stood up and in front of
150 200 people they say I'd like to say
thanks to my mom for helping me get up
this morning and get to school and then
we all say and then they say on the
count of two one two and the whole room
claps right and you saw that happen and
so and it was real too it was real the
kids were actually that was cool too
because it wasn't an act so exactly I
thought that was remarkable because what
you were doing was
training so one of the things that's
very difficult that behavioral
psychologists identified was that it's
easier to use punishment than reward
because infractions stand out and
progress is subtle and so one of the
things you want to do with children is
you want to watch them like Hawks so
that when they do something good you can
say this is what you did it was good
here's a pat you can do that with your
wife and your husband too by the way and
it's very effective but you have to be
attentive and so I like your pyramid too
because what you have is when people are
barely in the game at the bottom you're
using avoidance there it's like get your
act together you've got to straighten
yourself up but then the rest of the
pyramid is upward aiming and
reward-based and so that's a nice
dynamic between restriction and
opportunity right and that's also
something that's not tyrannical because
T the only form of reward tyrants use is
if you quit doing that I'll stop hitting
you right and no I mean obviously that
isn't Michaela but you know the thing is
is that you've got to create an
environment where that Invisible Shield
that was around in the 1980s has been
returned you know and we have to build
that shield now because it isn't there
anymore we don't have the collective
culture and the collective virtue and
the collective understanding and Trust
that's required for freedom to flourish
we just don't have it so we have created
that within our school walls and people
don't understand that that needs to be
created in society and that all schools
need to be doing it that's right and so
we have a book called The Power of
culture and our the reason why it's
called the power of culture is because
you know that that quote uh culture eats
strategy for breakfast I am constantly
watching our culture and keeping it just
where it needs to be and that is mainly
through my staff so you asked me about
the staff how do I get the staff to
where they need to be so people my staff
are always fascinated by how much time I
spend with them individually and how
much time we spend talking about
philosophy and politics um like you know
new staff joining always say but why
aren't we talking about teaching methods
why aren't we talking about turn to your
partner and we do do that as well
obviously because they need to be
trained to teach as we teach but the
time I spend with them is all on culture
so we will talk we I have videos of you
talking about different ideas little
clips and I'll use a clip there's a
lovely clip of you talking with John
McWater actually that I use and um the
two of you are talking about how you're
both a bit odd and how uh when I say odd
uh you're guys who like to think outside
the box and that you you live in your
heads and you're quite happy to live in
your heads but that actually for most
people we are group animals and that we
need to belong to something and I show
them that and I say well isn't that
interesting because that's what we're
doing here at Michaela we're creating a
group Culture where we are part of the
school and where we are part of of the
country so uh uh England is playing in
the Euros at the moment next Thursday uh
at 5:00 p.m. England is playing Denmark
we have made a massive deal of of this
we have English flags all over the
school we've we are inviting the kids
back after school to watch the England
game in school and there's loads of kids
that have signed up and they're going to
bring their little English flags and
we're going to have extra English flags
and um we've told them that they can
come in uniform or they can come in
their own clothes as long as they're
wearing the English shirt right now this
is us actively encouraging them to
identify with their country as opposed
to saying I'm Nigerian I'm Gham I'm
jamaic
I'm you know I'm I'm Iranian Etc or or
I'm Hindu I'm Muslim Britain isn't for
me you know we we we sing God the Save
the King every every every week we teach
them their history we celebrate uh the
King's birthday on Friday just so
yesterday uh was the King's birthday and
so we had little cakes with with the
British colors on them and we had all
our flags and our our conversation uh
for the lunch topic was about Britain so
we do all of this stuff to bring us all
together so that we can be one big happy
family and I don't think people realize
just how much schools contribute to the
cohesion of a country and just how much
schools are required for a succeed for a
country to succeed and um and so and we
just forget about them and we forget
about kids and partly I think that maybe
this is because teaching has
historically always been a female
profession so people always think being
a pilot oh my goodness it's so So
Glamorous it's so hard Etc because it
historically it's been a male profession
and it's like 97% or something male now
but the fact is you only need a high
school degree in order to become a pilot
and it's actually pretty simple because
the the planes are are are are are
automatic I mean it really isn't that
hard whereas teaching is so hard to do
it well and running a school so hard
which is why so many schools fail
because it's really really difficult but
because people don't take an interest in
schools and they don't take an interest
in kids and it's just seen as a thing
that just happens I also think that in
the west we seem to think that children
are just born the way they're born and
in the East they don't in the East I
remember once giving I was at a
conference and I said what happens in
the west when a child tries something
and succeeds at it we westerners say
Well done you're so clever and in the
East what they say is well done you
tried really hard and that means that
the next time the Western boy tries he
he he thinks something he can't do he
thinks am I clever enough to do this and
if he doesn't feel clever enough then he
won't try whereas in the East they think
well I tried hard the last time try hard
this time and I will succeed and once at
a conference I said this and a Chinese
woman came up to me and she said
absolutely 100% agree with everything
you say except that in the East they
wouldn't say Well done at the beginning
which made me
laugh yeah right right reward is harder
to come by okay so so let let's use that
I have another question for you then
so I spent a lot of time studying the
literature on the prediction of
performance and you can predict how well
people will perform in a complex
environment by measuring their general
intelligence and their conscientiousness
those are the best two predictors now
your school is not a selective school so
you I would presume that the average IQ
in your school is probably a little
higher than 100 because your parents are
selecting in but basically you're
dealing with a normal distribution in an
average population and yet your kids are
advancing very rapidly and they do
extremely well on objective tests so now
I saw how effective your teaching was
but I'm quite struck by that and so what
I would like to know is you know that
there's great differences in people
inate abilities and and but but you are
also producing a generic success that
extends across well obviously across
class and race and within the confines
of your unselected population and so how
is it that you've come to understand the
relative contribution of let's say the
intelligence that's god-given so to
speak and the discipline and strategy
and structure that your school is
providing
and then how much variation do you still
see you know you've moved the whole
population upward but how much variation
do you still see in terms of talent and
ability within your own school yeah so
there's huge variation of course there
is because there's such a thing as being
talented at certain things and not and
that you know that's the way children
are born um having said that our
children all outperform what they would
have done had they been at another
school so they reached their potential
tenfold now the fact is that um so I
talked about the importance of knowledge
and making that Central to your
classroom and uh helping them become
creative through knowledge uh all our
children manage that and by learning so
much that is why we do so well in the
end on the exams but it's not just the
final exams our children know so much
about all sorts um and they and and what
annoys me is that people always talk
about how successful we are in our exams
as if that's all we are we are so much
more than that our children are really
interesting people what do you mean all
you are that's not an easy thing the
people who are putting you down for
accomplishing that have some real
thinking to do because what you did
purely on the objective side is people
would have regarded that as impossible
so they don't get to play that G but I
agree it's not all you're doing well and
so what you're talking about there is
being able to live a life of dignity so
we our values are small C conservative
values that we talk about the children
all the time the idea of being able to
take responsibility not being a victim
somebody who has a sense of Duty towards
others I don't disrupt my class not just
because I don't want to get a detention
but because I wouldn't want to disrupt
the learning from my classmates um being
somebody who is able to sacrifice so
that position on prayer for instance you
know the Muslim children well they put
up with not having a prayer room they
make that sacrifice for the betterment
of the whole the Jehovah Witness
children um there's MCB Beth that we
teach as a set gcsc text it has witches
in it they don't like the magic uh we
also teach um A Christmas Carol
Christmas in there they don't like it
because of Christmas but they put up
with it because they think about they
self-sacrifice for the betterment of the
whole the Hindu children who think well
we want our separate plates at lunch
because the eggs have touched the plates
so we don't like that they too
self-sacrifice so that for the
betterment of the whole because the
problem with multiculturalism is that if
each group is vying for their rights and
it's always I want this I want that and
you're a racist or you're an islamophobe
unless I get it then we'll never be
happy we'll never be successful and
schools struggle with this because they
are Multicultural communities and
unfortunately our whole culture
encourages them to divide children
according to race and religion and
sexuality and so on so you have your
LGBT group over there you have your
Hindu group over there the Muslim group
over here and so on if that happens in
your school it becomes impossible
because you're trying to please
everybody and sometimes those rights
Clash so for instance
uh Muslim children want to eat halal
food seik children are not allowed to
eat halal food well what do you do if
you have a situation where family lunch
means that you all share the same food
well I'll tell you what you do you go
vegetarian so we all eat vegetarian food
and that we we do practical things we
don't have a prayer room we have
vegetarian food we we we we we use the
same plates and it doesn't matter who
you are you have to leave those demands
at the gate and make sure that you uh
you value the whole over your individual
rights because you understand that it's
your
responsibility to to to to Value the
group and the school over your own
personal
desires are you tired of feeling
sluggish rundown or just not your best
self take control of your health and
vitality with balance of nature balance
of nature fruit and veggies are a great
way to make sure you're getting your
essential nutritional ingredients every
single day they use an advanced cold
vacuum process that encapsulates fruits
and vegetables into Whole Food
supplements without sacrificing their
natural antioxidants the capsules are
completely void of additives fillers
extracts synthetics pesticides or added
sugar the only thing in balance of
nature fruit and veggie capsules are
well fruits and veggies right now you
can order with promo code Jordan to get
35% off your first order plus a free
fibrant spice supplement there's never
been an easier way to make sure you're
getting your daily dose of fruits and
vegetables experience balance of nature
for yourself today go to balanceof
nature.com and use promo code Jordan for
35% off your first order as a preferred
customer plus get a free bottle of fiber
and spice that's balance of nature.com
promo code Jordan for 35% off your first
preferred order plus a free bottle of
fiber and
spice well well you're also well the
thing is too you you make a case that I
would argue is actually more subtle than
that okay because it well it isn't only
that you're calling upon your kids and
your parents
to sacrifice what you've pointed out and
I think this is evident in your school
is
that the freedom that the Libertarians
and let's say even the anarchic leftist
radicals desire is actually only
possible within the confines of a shared
community and so you know your opponents
might say well look how strict you are
with the children they have no freedom
but your rejoiner is something like no
we establish a community with boundaries
and walls so that people know what the
expectations are with regards to Upward
striving and then within that they have
true Freedom so you know I'll give you
an example this is a cool that that a
cool example true Freedom requires
restriction yes go on AB ABS well so
when Moses faces the pharaoh to free the
Israelites God tells him to say
something to the Pharaoh and he says it
repeatedly and some of it's famous he
says Let My People will go and that's a
civil rights cry that is not what Moses
says Moses says God said to me let my
people go so that they may worship me in
the desert and so it's a vision of
ordered freedom and not a vision of an
anarchic Freedom what the Israelites
have in the desert which they hate is
anarchic freedom right because so they
go from tyranny to anarchic freedom and
it's a catastrophe so what's set up
instead is a hierarchy like your pyramid
that's the subsidiary structure and
that's responsibility as the antidote to
tyranny and slavery and you do that in
your school and so you are actually
providing those kids with freedom you
are not taking it away and you're what
you're doing is restricting Anarchy
indeed and the thing is in order for
children look the Christian God would
also say honor thy mother and father
right and what do they mean by honor thy
mother and father you your father and
mother you you love you and they are
going to restrict some of your freedoms
and they're going to force you to do
things like eat your broccoli that you
don't like and your teachers are going
to force you to learn your Calculus even
though you think it's a bit boring and
they're going to the there's going to be
all kinds of restrictions around you and
you get annoyed as a kid because you
think I want to be able to do whatever I
want one day you will be able to do
whatever you want but by then you have
earned that right by then you have you
have taken the wisdom from your elders
you talk about hierarchies and you say
hierarchies are sometimes bad because
they are hierarchies of power you're
absolutely right but hierarchies of
competence are good and the fact is that
the adults here are meant to be the more
competent ones and they're meant to
embrace the definition of adulthood well
it's meant to be unfortunately adults
these days don't feel like they're the
most competent in fact they're made to
feel like they're bad people if they
insist that children should listen to
them and the whole like the whole
student voice thing and this you know
giving them tons of choice about stuff
and so on look we are meant I'm not
saying don't ever listen to Children
obviously you listen to them but you
also know that you know better right and
you make sure that you support them in
choosing the better choice and also in
knowing why it's the better choice we
don't say to kids look you know do
whatever you want go to the supermarket
and buy whatever you want well they'll
come back with a whole load of cookies
right I mean I find it hard enough now
to stay away from the cookies you know
but thank goodness my mother told me to
eat the broccoli because I eat the
broccoli cuz I now have the knowledge
that it's better for me and I have the I
also have the experience of knowing that
if I don't eat broccoli that I'm not
going to feel very good in myself I need
to go to the gym and so on kids don't
understand that so because they don't
understand that we need to pull the
fence in tight and it's our job as
adults to be instilling these habits in
them and then they climb that pyramid
till eventually they get to the top and
it's who they are so so you were asking
for those kids who cognitively they're
perhaps not as bright as other ones how
do they feel happy and satisfied because
we very much don't just talk about
cognitive success we talk about the kind
of person you are and that it's who we
are is the top of the pyramid can you be
somebody who's grateful who's kind who's
decent you know for some of our children
they might be the manager in a in in a
shoe shop well you know what well done
you and if you're somebody who can turn
up every day on time and you can pay for
your mortgage and you can look after
your wife and your children good on you
that is a hugely successful life and
it's about recognizing that a life of
dignity is one of of of of purpose of
knowing who you're going to be of trying
to become something of being able when
you're 90 years old to look back from
your deathbed and look at your life and
say I lived for something I contributed
I made made the world into a better
place that's what you want you know
becoming some billionaire I mean I don't
know most billionaires are unhappy
certainly their children are unhappy and
often because their children were just
given exponential choices have whatever
you want have a great time you know what
that makes children miserable what makes
children happy is the love of a a a a
restricted choice of teaching them
knowledge of allowing them to stand on
the shoulders of giants as as Newton
said he said if I see further it is
because I stand on the shoulders of
giants and what he meant by that
Shakespeare Newton even Thatcher who
went to Newton's uh well the equivalent
Girls Grammar School they they all
learned traditionally in Shakespeare's
day they would memorize loads they would
read Latin test texts how did
Shakespeare become the great that he is
he actually he he stole stuff from other
authors he copied that is what children
need to do in the first instance they
need to be able to copy they need to
learn from others and that is by showing
them through example developing those
habits so that eventually they at top of
the pyramid so just yesterday our year
11s grade Els who took their GCSE exams
the exams finished yesterday so that we
had a big pizza party and they had cans
of coke for the first time in five years
okay they've never had they're there oh
my goodness Pizza that we ordered in
from like dominoes you know and we had
um cans of coke and they were there like
wow this is amazing the kids can't
believe next Thursday with the England
game they're allowed to bring their own
crisps and their own chocolate and they
they think Heaven has come early they
can't believe it right and that's
because we don't normally give them this
sort of stuff and then children are
really grateful for those small things
and so they were having this massive
party outside and it was wonderful and
they were signing their shirts and so
and they finished their exams and they
know they've done really well because
they have climbed that pyramid and my
thing is you know when we have our prom
next week I'm going to be saying to them
you know we try and get the little
little birdie to the top and then we
tell them fly little birdie and that's
where those wings need to be able to fly
now the only way those wings are going
to be able to fly is if we pump them
through of wonderful knowledge so that
they can come up with their own creative
ideas and they they've learned how to
think through attaining and grasping
that knowledge over over those 5 years
and and that we also have taught them
what it is to live a life of dignity
that they're looking for purpose they're
looking for something in life that's
going to ignite a passion in them that
they're going to love and that they're
going to be able to contribute to
society that they're not just going out
there to make a load of money you will
never see me or any of my teachers at
assembly talk about the reason why you
need to do well in your exams is to get
a good job we would never say that ever
the reason why you want to do well in
your jobs you're sorry the reason why
you want to do well on your exams is cuz
you want to be the kind of person who
works hard for something and then gets
the best that you can get that is what
you want out of life right you know not
everybody is going to get the top score
of a nine what you want is to get the
best score that you can get and the only
way you're going to know that is if
you've worked like hell to get there so
our kids who are getting the fours and
fives still passing the sixes but
they're not getting the nines they don't
feel bad about themselves because they
have purpose because they're on the same
Journey as the ones who are clever than
they are to be the kind of person who's
finding purpose and who is going to have
dignity and I think many years ago you
know I think of my uncle Harold this is
one of the training for instance that I
do with
staff and I um I showed them a picture
of my uncle Harold my uncle Harold was
from the Caribbean and he he he lived in
in in Detroit eventually and he
he he he this's this wonderful photo of
him with this white hat and this white
suit and he looks so sharp and it
probably was taken in the 1940s and I
remember Uncle Harold when he was very
very old and he used to give us a my
sister and me a little quarter you know
this is in the ' 80s he'd give us a
quarter and we would think oh we've got
a quarter and it was just so exciting
just like our kids think we've got cans
of coke isn't it exciting because we
weren't given everything my the family
my family we grew up we didn't have
loads and my mother worked night shifts
as a nurse and my dad was a lecturer and
he was always sponsoring family from
Guyana my father came from Guyana my
mother is Jamaican and they would bring
family and we always had family at home
uh finding them jobs in McDonald's and
so on uh in order because my father
wanted to help his family come to a
better country where they they would
have a better life and um my uncle
Harold you know you look at him in that
suit and what I always say to my
teachers is everybody goes on about how
racist everything is well I can tell I
tell you in the 1940s it was pretty damn
racist right life was hard for Uncle
Harold but I never heard Uncle howold
complain I never heard him going on
about racism my uncle Harold got his
head down and did what was necessary for
his family just like my father and my
mother did and I never heard my dad and
my mom ever complain about racism ever
they just work like hell not just for
themselves and for me and my sister but
they worked like health for their
families to be able to bring them to
Canada cuz I grew up in Toronto in
Canada and at 15 I came to Britain and
you know that small C conservatism is
just part of who I am and um you know
it's funny I was watching this
documentary about uh Clarence Thomas and
he was saying how when he was in his
early 20s he became this black radical
and he was this total leftist and he
really reminded me of me because
eventually he found his way back to
small SE conservatism because he'd been
in that was instilled in him by his
grandfather when he was growing up and
it was a very similar thing with me I
became this black leftist Etc became
this black te you know I was this
teacher and then eventually I just it
all felt wrong to me and then over years
okay so wait so I'm going to stop you
there I'm going to stop you there
because well this is why first we're out
of time on this side yes but more
importantly that's exactly what I want
to delve into on The Daily wire side yes
yes I'm sorry it's true I I I no no no
that's fine no but that's a perfect well
it's a perfect place to stop Paradise
means walled Gard Garden right yes right
right and the walls are there so to make
the garden flourish EXA Eden Eden means
well-watered place and that's what you
have at Michaela's school you have a
Walled Garden that's right and you're
watering the kids and that's working and
so that's a lovely that balance between
order
and natural flourishing right that's
paradise and and I could see your kids
participating in that at Michaela School
so congratulations on that so for
everybody watching and listening we're
going to switch to the Daily wire side
now and I'm going to talk to Katherine
in more detail about well this
transformation let's say the one that
she described that also characterized
Clarence Thomas and many people because
most people have a leftist proclivity
let's say when they're young and
foolish radical leftist proclivity when
they're young and foolish and full of
undiscerning empathy let's put it that
way and so we'll talk about that on the
daily wire side and so join us there and
thank you to everybody watching and
listening for your time and attention
and also to you today Katherine for
walking us through Michaela school and
sharing the thing that's so striking
about listening to you apart from the
conceptual element is that you are
obviously thrilled with what you're
doing and to be part of the lives of
your children and that's I could see
that at the school but I can also hear
it in every well in your passion and
your what would you say your obvious
pleasure in the specific stories you
tell about the kids and the love that
you have for them is that's the
culture yeah that was really what got me
yes when I went to your school because I
could see that and it's so rare and it's
so painful that it's rare because it
could be everywhere if people would take
the responsibility and open their eyes
that's true but the thing is y the thing
is it's I I I I understand why they
don't know how to figure out what to do
what we do because they're told so many
things that are the opposite to what we
do but you figured it out I know but and
we're going to we're going to try to
figure out why and so you people can all
join us on the daily wire side to go
into that so thank you very much ma'am
and uh well thank you for having me
we'll meet again no doubt in the UK and
and uh thank you to all you who've been
watching
[Music]